---
layout: post
title:  "List of my favourite tools"
date:   2024-08-01 09:29:20 +0700
categories: updates
usemathjax: true
---

*Last update: 1 Aug. 2024* 

Here, I will keep a list of all the tools that I use and like. It might be interesting for you too. I will update this as it goes.

## Note Taking

- **Obsidian**: A powerful knowledge base that works on local markdown files and offers a rich graph view. It is my go-to note-taking app.
- **Joplin**: An open-source note-taking and to-do application with synchronization capabilities and support for markdown. It works with most cloud storage services, including Dropbox, for free.
- **reMarkable**: An overkill note-taking notepad! It works superbly, but most people probably wouldn't need it.
- **Notion**: An all-in-one workspace for notes, tasks, databases, and collaboration, offering extensive customization. The free version is still good enough.
- **hackMD**: A collaborative markdown editor designed for developers and technical documentation, with real-time editing.

## Literature Review

- **Zotero**: A free, easy-to-use tool to help you collect, organize, cite, and share research. To use it extensively, you might end up paying since the 300MB free space is quite limited.
- **[scholar-inbox.com](https://www.scholar-inbox.com/)**: It is super useful and free to use paper recommendation systems that, based on your prior publications and list of favorite papers, monitor recently published open access papers and send a recommendation list to your inbox. You can provide easy feedback on these recommendations to refine your tailored algorithm. Now, it has been more than six months that I have been using it, mostly for meetings where it is easier to write than type. Unfortunately, there aren't many of these meetings these days.
- **[arxiv-sanity-lite.com](https://arxiv-sanity-lite.com/)**: If you dont wanna go through all the hussels of setting up scholar-inbox, this one is easier and lighter ;-).

## macOS

- **Things**: A task management app with a simple and intuitive UX. You just buy it once, with no monthly membership fees.
- **mactop**: A productivity tool for macOS that allows you to monitor the state of your Mac in real time.

## Communication

- **Ferdium**: A messaging browser that allows you to manage multiple messaging apps in one place, improving communication efficiency.

## Coding

- **Wrap**: A versatile tool for code wrapping, ensuring clean and readable code formatting across different programming languages.

